---
permalink: /research/
author_profile: true
redirect_from:
  - /research
  - /research.html
---

{% include base_path %}

## Works in progress

[**Who Gets a Second Chance? Effectiveness and Equity in Supervision of Criminal Offenders**](/files/jmp.pdf) (JMP)
<dl><dd>Most convicted criminals are sentenced to probation and allowed to return home. On probation, however, a technical rule violation such as not paying fees can result in incarceration. Rule violations account for more than 30% of all prison spells in many states and are significantly more common among black offenders. I test whether technical rules are effective tools for identifying likely reoffenders and deterring crime and examine their disparate racial impacts using administrative data from North Carolina. Analysis of a 2011 reform eliminating prison punishments for technical violations reveals that 40% of rule breakers would go on to commit crimes if their violations were ignored. The same reform also closed a 33% black-white gap in incarceration rates without substantially increasing the black-white reoffending gap. These effects combined imply that technical rules target riskier probationers overall, but disproportionately affect low-risk black offenders. To justify black probationers’ higher violation rate on efficiency grounds, their crimes must be roughly twice as socially costly as white probationers’. Exploiting the repeat-spell nature of the North Carolina data, I estimate a semi-parametric competing risks model that allows me to distinguish the effects of particular types of technical rules from unobserved probationer heterogeneity. The estimates reveal that the deterrent effects of harsh punishments for rule breaking are negligible. Rules related to the payment of fees and fines, which are common in many states, are ineffective in tagging likely reoffenders and drive differential impacts by race. These findings illustrate the potentially large influence of facially race-neutral policies on racial disparities in criminal justice outcomes.</dd></dl>

[**Does Banning the Box Help Ex-Offenders Get Jobs? Evaluating the Effects of a Prominent Example**](/files/btb_seattle_0418.pdf)  
Accepted, *Journal of Labor Economics*; [*Online appendix*](/files/btb_online_appendix_0418.pdf)
<dl><dd>This paper uses merged administrative employment and conviction data to evaluate laws that restrict employers' information about job seekers' criminal records. I first show that records are barriers to employment: earnings decline 30% after a first conviction due to both less work overall and shifts to lower paying industries. However, I find that a 2013 Seattle law barring employers from examining job applicants' criminal records until after an initial screening had no impact on ex-offenders' employment or wages regardless of race. The results are consistent with ex-offenders applying only to jobs where a clean record is not a relevant qualification.</dd></dl>

[**Does Incarceration Increase Crime?**](https://yotamshemtov.github.io/files/YotamShemTov_JMP.pdf) with [Yotam Shem-Tov](https://yotamshemtov.github.io/index.html)    
<dl><dd>This paper studies the causal effect of incarceration on reoffending using discontinuities in state sentencing guidelines and two decades of administrative records from North Carolina. A regression discontinuity analysis shows that one year of incarceration reduces the likelihood of committing new assault, property, and drug offenses within three years of conviction by 38%, 24%, and 20%, respectively. Incarceration sentences temporarily incapacitate offenders by removing them from society but can also influence post-release criminal behavior. To parse the non-linear and heterogeneous effects of these channels, we develop an econometric model of sentencing length and recidivism. Our model allows for Roy-style selection into sentencing on the basis of latent criminality. We propose a two-step control function estimator of the model parameters and show that our estimates accurately reproduce the reduced form effects of the sentencing discontinuities we study. Our parameter estimates indicate that incarceration has modest crime-reducing behavioral effects that are diminishing in incarceration length. A cost-benefit analysis suggests, however, that the benefit of reducing crime by lengthening sentences (through both incapacitation and behavioral channels) is outweighed by the large fiscal costs of incarceration.</dd></dl>

[**The Effects of Teacher Quality on Criminal Behavior**](https://drive.google.com/uc?export=pdf&id=1agkUuMjtPIPoQlgQEel3tVVofs2WFVsA) with [Jonathan Schellenberg](https://sites.google.com/view/jonathanschellenberg/home?authuser=0) and [Yotam Shem-Tov](https://yotamshemtov.github.io/index.html)  
<dl><dd>This paper investigates the impact of teacher quality on future criminal behavior. Using a unique data set linking the universe of public school records to administrative criminal justice records for the state of North Carolina, we demonstrate strong associations between future criminal activity and early life education outcomes including test scores, attendance, and disciplinary records. We estimate value-added models measuring the causal impacts of teachers on short-run cognitive and non-cognitive outcomes in a multivariate random effects framework, and link these short-run effects to teacher effects on adult crime. We find that teachers primarily influence future crime through a non-cognitive channel, and that their cognitive and non-cognitive impacts are orthogonal. This result implies that test score-based measures miss an important component of the social value of teacher quality, suggesting scope for improved teacher assessment systems that also account for non-cognitive gains.</dd></dl>

[**Family Formation and Crime**](http://maximmassenkoff.com/FamilyFormationAndCrime.pdf) with [Maxim Massenkoff](http://maximmassenkoff.com)  
Coverage: [Marginal Revolution](https://marginalrevolution.com/marginalrevolution/2019/11/more-pregnancy-less-crime.html), [Mother Jones](https://www.motherjones.com/kevin-drum/2019/11/having-a-baby-cuts-crime-by-25/), [The Economist](https://www.economist.com/graphic-detail/2020/01/03/the-prospect-of-parenthood-makes-people-more-law-abiding)
<dl><dd>While economists typically study the effects of punishments and taxes on crime and drug use, sociologists have emphasized transformative "turning points" which reduce deviant behavior by strengthening social bonds. We use administrative data from Washington State to perform a large-scale study of childbirth and marriage as turning points. Our event study analysis indicates that pregnancy triggers sharp declines in crime rivaling any known intervention. For mothers, criminal offending drops precipitously in the first few months of pregnancy, stabilizing at half of pre-pregnancy levels three years after the birth. Men show a smaller, but still important, 25 percent decline beginning at the onset of pregnancy, although domestic violence arrests spike for fathers immediately after the birth. A design using stillbirths as counterfactuals suggests a causal role for children. In contrast, marriage is a stopping point, marking the completion of a roughly 50 percent decline in offending for both men and women. The data present a unique opportunity to test the implications of a dynamic rational addiction model, which suggests forward-looking behavior among married and unmarried mothers.</dd></dl>

[**The Effects of Job Loss on Crime: Evidence from Administrative Data**](/files/jobloss_crime_ekr_vf.pdf)  
Revision in progress
<dl><dd>This paper investigates the effects of job loss on recidivism using a novel merge of employer-employee wage data to administrative records on crime. I first use firm-level employment shocks to study the reduced form impact of job loss on offending. I then use a kink in unemployment insurance benefits to distinguish economic incentives from other factors, such as incapacitation through time spent at work, as a mechanism. I find that property crimes and domestic violence rise sharply after a layoff and remain elevated for up to two years. Economic incentives are an important mechanism, consistent with Becker-Ehrlich models.</dd></dl>



## Published work

[**The Rise and Fall of Female Labor Force Participation During World War II in the United States**](/files/rise_and_fall.pdf)  
*The Journal of Economic History*, Vol. 78, No. 3 (September 2018); [*Online appendix*](/files/rise_and_fall_online_appendix.pdf)
<dl><dd>I use new data on employment and job placements during WWII to characterize the wartime surge in female work and its subsequent impact on female employment in the United States. The geography of female wartime work was primarily driven by industrial mobilization, not drafted men’s withdrawal from local labor markets. After the war, returning veterans and sharp cutbacks in war-related industries displaced many new female entrants, despite interest in continued work. As a result, areas most exposed to wartime work show limited overall effects on female labor force participation in 1950 and only marginal increases in durables manufacturing employment.</dd></dl>
